All right, so now that we are connected to our small, lightweight database, let's have some fun and
do something with it.
So we're going to now learn a little bit of the basics of the sequel programming language, structured
query language and what you will start to see is that some of the basic concepts that we've been doing
in Java like creating classes and then creating instances of those classes and using collections to
store instances of classes and retrieve them back out and even using the Streams API to sum up all of
the values of a property of a bunch of instances and things of that sort.
Many of these operations and activities have parallels with sequel.
And so we're going to see some of these parallels now.
All right.
So let's just jump right in and start issuing some SQL commands and see what we can do here.
So if you click on this tab right here next to the objects, there's a tab called sequel as well.
I'm going to click on that and in this tab we can actually start entering SQL commands.
I'm going to make my window a little bigger here.
All right, so the first thing we're going to do.
Let's do the database equivalent of creating a class.
OK.
So I'd say the database equivalent to creating a class in Java would be to create a table.
And so we can use some SQL commands to do this.
So let's just create a really basic table one that has a first name column, last name column, a date
of birth column and maybe a salary column.
OK.
All right.
So to do this, we will issue some standardized SQL commands.
For the most part, SQL is not case sensitive, but by convention, a lot of database commands will
tend to be upper cased.
So I will try to remember to consistently do that.
But like I said, it doesn't really matter.
All right.
So the command to create a table is create a table and then we'll give the table a name so we can call
it something like people.
You'll typically see database table names in the in the plural form, right?
So if we're going to have a table to store a person in it, that table's name might typically be people,
though this is just a convention that I see frequently.
It doesn't have to be done that way, though.
All right.
Next, we're going to use a parentheses, an opening parentheses.
Oh, and there's one more field that I forgot to mention.
Let's also have an ID field.
It's extremely typical in databases to have an ID field for all of your records.
It's it's common.
Not always done.
There are alternatives to doing this as well, but let's go ahead and just do it this way for now.
All right.
So the first field we're actually going to define is going to be an ID field.
Now this field for the ID will be numeric, and we will actually allow the database to populate this
field automatically for us.
So in other words, the database is going to keep track of every time we insert a new person into this
table.
The database itself will generate a new, unique ID for each of these people.
OK.
And this will just give us a really easy way to identify individuals and retrieve them.
I just using this ID.
All right.
So we're going to have a field, we'll call it I.D. space, and then we need to specify what it's data
type is.
So when we create classes as we define the fields or properties of the class, we have to define what
the data type is free to those fields.
So if we had an ID field in Java, we might use type long.
If we have a first name field in Java, we might use a data type of string.
Databases have basically the exact same concept, and that's why it's actually pretty nice to understand
how you can go from Java class to database table definition.
They have pretty good one to one relationships with each other.
So there are actually a number of data types that exist in any given database now.
Each database engine that is the application that implements the database like H2, and there are others
that I'll mention briefly here.
Each database engine may have slight differences in the set of data types that it supports, but there
are some fairly general standards across most databases these days.
When in doubt, though, you can actually look up the data types that are supported for any given database
and in fact, will go ahead and do that real quick.
Let me go back to the browser here.
And I will search for H2 database.
And I'm already on the H2 database website here, and we can come down to data types right there.
And so this is showing a quick index of all of the standard data types that H2 supports.
So it's got integer Boolean tiny and small and big and identity decimal double real.
Now we're not going to analyze each and every one of these right now, but I can just tell you real
quick that probably what we want is big and and if I click on big and it tells me here how big is big
enough.
And it looks like it's pretty big.
So that is actually equivalent to a java long.
And because H2 is written in Java itself, it's documentation actually does a good job of letting us
know internally how these database types are represented in their own internal Java code.
So that actually makes it pretty easy to understand, OK.
If I want the Java equivalent of the lung, I could probably use a big ant.
All right.
So now, armed with that knowledge, we can come over here and say that this is going to be a big event.
Now notice this is one of the many differences between Java and sequel in Java.
When we're creating properties or fields, the data type would come first, followed by the name of
the field.
But here we give the name ID.
First, that's the name, and then the data type is coming after that.
All right, so big int.
And then we want the database to populate this field for us automatically, as I mentioned earlier.
So to make it do that, I have to specify a keyword called auto increment auto underscore increment
like so.
All right.
Next up, we can now define the additional columns of this table.
So we've got an ID column there.
Let's have a first name column.
So first name, move that cursor out of the way and now it's data type.
Now we're going to make this data type something equivalent to a Java string.
However, sequel does not have a string data type.
Instead, what it has is something called a VAR car or a VAR char or VAR care, whatever you want to
call it.
Usually, I think most teams will call it a VAR car and that is written as VAR CAGR.
And then we can use parentheses here to state how many actual characters wide we want this field to
be.
So because databases specialize in storing massive amounts of data, we typically will define how wide
we want a given field to be.
Now, with numeric types, you don't have to usually put a number there because it's implied by the
name of the numerical type itself, like a big end is going to be so wide versus a tiny end or whatever.
But with VAR car, which stands for variable characters or variable length of variable length of characters,
you typically will specify how many characters wide do you want to support.
And you'll commonly see something like 255, though if you know for certain that you need less or more,
you can certainly change that number.
All right.
So first name comma, then last name.
Also note now that I'm not using camel case here.
I could.
But again, the typical database convention that I've always seen is typically to define column names
as all uppercase, though it doesn't really matter and most databases, but also to separate out the
parts of the word with an underscore.
So whereas in Java, we'd be using camel case saying first and then capital in for name with no spaces
or underscores in typical database standards, you'd use an underscore again.
Now these are just conventions on most databases.
And if you work in a company doing database development of any sort for your Java applications, there
may be standards that will be taught to you by whoever's in charge of.
That might be database administrators also called DBUS or just other people on your team.
Or it could be that nobody really cares.
All right.
And this will also be of type VAR car 255.
And then let's have a date of birth filled now for date of birth, if we were doing this in Java.
I might prefer to use at least the local date time or if I know about the time zone and care about it,
I might use a zoned local date time right for databases.
There are equivalent data types, so let's go look at what some of those may be.
All right, so let's see here just going to OK, so we've got a time filled.
I can tell you now that's equivalent to a local time in database in Java and then a time with time zone.
So that would be a time with the time zone.
Information added in a date would be equivalent to a local date, a time stamp.
Now that would be equivalent to a local date time.
That's where you've got the date and the time all together in the database.
It's called a time stamp and then they've got a time stamp with time zone, so that would be equivalent
to a zoned date time.
And pardon me, I think I said earlier zoned local date time, which doesn't quite make sense, but
a zoned date time.
OK, so these are our date and time data types.
So for now, I'm inclined to just use the time stamp.
Now I know I said earlier that if at all possible, if you have total control over the database, you
may want to prefer something like a time stamp with time zone.
However, eventually we are going to be playing around with loading up some of the data from our massive
five million record data set into this database.
And we already know that that data set does not give us an easy way to know the time zone, and so time
stamp will be sufficient here.
All right, so we're going to use the time stamp.
All right.
So, Dobbies space, time stamp, and then I think I also said salary, so comma, salary, salary,
and let's go look at the data types here.
So for salary, I think I already know we're likely going to want to use decimal.
And if we click on that, we will see that this data type actually is a big decimal in Java, and that
is the data type that you typically want to use when dealing with money, right?
Though in our example projects, up until now, working with this particular data set, we haven't been
using Big Decimal because the salary data in our test dataset actually doesn't have any decimals in
them, and therefore they can be treated as large integers.
However, we can go ahead and model it a little more accurately.
Going forward, I suppose, and use a big decimal.
All right.
So that would be called a decimal here.
So decimal.
All right.
And now we are finished.
OK.
And so that concludes defining all of the columns here.
And so now we can close off this table creation with a closing parentheses there and then a semicolon.
So yes, you cannot get away from the semicolons here.
All right.
And now that we have that, we can actually execute this sequel.
And so we can come up here to this little picture of the running man here.
Now there are a couple of them.
We want this one here, though, or we could also do a control enter.
And if we click this, then squirrel is going to execute what we've written here.
So let's go ahead and just click that.
There we go.
And hopefully down here at the bottom, you'll have something green query one of one rose.
OK.
And if you've got that little green message, then that will tell you that your sequel was executed
successfully.
All right.
So now let's go ahead and enter one record into this database, which would be somewhat equivalent to.
We've just created a Java class called person, although in database world, it's people, and now we're
going to create an instant of.
And now we're going to create an instance of the person class.
In this case, we're going to create an actual person and store that person into our newly created people
table.
All right.
So to do that, we're going to use another SQL command, which is insert into people, and then we're
going to specify the names of the columns that we are going to be providing data for.
So because this first column ID is auto incremented, we don't actually need to specify that.
So we're not going.
So we're actually going to leave that out.
We will specify first name, comma, last name, comma, date of birth.
Comma and a salary.
Close parentheses space.
Values.
Parentheses and so now here's where we actually provide the actual data.
Okay, so in this first bit here, we're saying, what columns are we going to provide values for?
And then in this next bit here with the values bit, we're actually going to provide those values.
OK.
So for a first name, we can do anything here.
Now, typically.
In school, when we are defining strings, what we in Java world think of their strings.
Strings are usually defined with double quotes, or you could use triple quotes if it's in the multi-line
format in sequel.
The standard is typically to use single quotes, though.
OK, so be careful about that because some databases and database clients care about that distinction.
All right, so single quote or single tick, single quote, and I'm just going to make up a name here,
Harry.
Close quote.
Comma and then a last name Johnson.
Comma and then a date of birth.
Now we're using the time stamp format here, so we actually need to know how to represent a timestamp
in a text format that H2 database will understand.
And so we're going to jump back over here to the database, to the documentation for age two again and
jump over to timestamp and look for an example of how to use this or how timestamps are specified.
Now, I'm not actually seeing an example here.
So what we may want to do is go up a little higher.
All right.
So it does say, see also timestamp literal grammar.
So I'm going to click on that and voila.
I think we are seeing some examples here now.
Of course, this is technically with time zone, but I think I know how to how to ignore the time zone
bits.
The part that I'm curious about is is just all of that there.
So it looks like the format is four digit year hyphen and then month and day and then our minutes seconds.
All right.
I think we can do that.
So let's jump back over here now and let's specify that.
So I'm going to specify that as text.
So I'm going to use a single tick again and I'm going to give a four digit year.
So I'm going to say something like 1950 hyphen and then a month.
And for the month, let's say March and for the date, I don't know.
Fifteenth.
Then a space and then a time.
So I will say 10.
Colon, forty five, colon 10.
Close that off.
All right.
And then a salary, so this should just be any number.
OK, so let's say that this person is making one hundred thousand.
And zero sense.
OK.
And I'm going to close that off.
And then.
Semicolon at the end.
All right, so now we're ready to execute this next sequel.
And now we can go ahead and click on this run sequel here.
All right.
So down here at the bottom, the status says one row inserted.
So I think that worked without any incident, but now we can confirm it by querying back out of the
database to see if we got our data.
And to do that, I will make another line here.
And now we'll do one more query before we end this particular lesson.
We will grab this data out.
So to do that, we will type select.
Asterisk from people, and we can do just that, that's like the simplest way to say basically to the
database.
Show me everything you've got in the people table.
So now let's execute just this line by just doing a controlled return.
All right.
So look at that.
Here's our result.
We've got a record with an idea of one first name, Harry last name Johnson.
Date of birth 1950 March 15th at 10:45 and 10 seconds with a salary of 100000.
So congratulations, we've now created our first table.
We've inserted one record into the table and we've queried that record back out of the table.
So in the next lesson, we'll learn a little more about how some of the sequel is working, and then
we'll will make a few more records and we'll learn a few more sequel tricks see in the next one.